Feature/vonk 9539 da vinci atr (#825)
FirelyTeam/firely-docs-firely-server: features_and_tools/custom_operations/davinci_data_export.rst

Use the same setup described in :ref:`feature_bulkdataexport_configuration`, including:

* BDE plugin enablement on the root branch:
	* including: ``Vonk.Plugin.BulkDataExport.GroupBulkDataExportConfiguration`` 
    * and additionally (for DaVinci): ``Vonk.Plugin.BulkDataExport.DaVinci.DaVinciDataExportConfiguration``

* task repository configuration on the ``/administration`` branch
* ``TaskFileManagement`` storage configuration
* ``BulkDataExport`` settings such as ``RepeatPeriod`` and retention settings

Because DaVinci export reuses the BDE task pipeline, there is no separate task storage or file storage configuration specific to ``$davinci-data-export``.

Prerequisites
-------------

There are a few prerequisites specifically for this export.

1. A search parameter for the PDex provider access use case flag on ``Consent.provision.action`` must be defined on the server. This is required for the ATR export use case, which filters ``Consent`` resources based on this flag. Add the search parameter and refresh the actual index as described in :ref:`the search parameter re-indexing documentation <feature_customsp_reindex_specific>`:

> 

Reviewer: Isn't this SearchParameter added automatically when the new schema version is deployed upon db migration? Will resources be indexed for this new SearchParameter upon migration automatically? Then I would not add this information about adding the SP itself and re-indexing manually. This feature is implemented in FS 6.8 and users would need to upgrade with a db migration anyway.

Author: I'm afraid this is indeed a search parameter people have to add manually. It is specific to only DaVinci, thats why

Reviewer: I do not remember having to add this search parameter for testing though, and you  mentioned earlier that we always index for this searchparameter regardless of the license a user has.

Author: Talking with @alexzautke and @cknaap we decided to provide the search parameter in the errata for R4. So it is automatically there. Only thing is that the user needs to 'activate' them by reindexing them. Since they are both currently only used for DaVinci, this seems to be the best way. I have added a description here.

Reviewer: They would need to do the re-index if they have data in the db already, but not if they start from scratch, right? Would be good to clarify this here and make a note of this in the release notes as well, along with the information on the schema change.

	 .. code-block:: json

			{
				"resourceType": "SearchParameter",
				"id": "consent-pdex-provider-access-use-case",
				"url": "http://hl7.org/fhir/us/davinci-pdex/SearchParameter/consent-pdex-provider-access-use-case",
				"version": "4.0.1",
				"name": "ConsentPdexProviderAccessUseCase",
				"status": "active",
				"publisher": "Firely",
				"description": "Search Consent resources by the PDex provider access use case flag on provision.action",
				"code": "pdex-provider-access-use-case",
				"base": ["Consent"],
				"type": "token",
				"expression": "Consent.provision.action.extension.where(url='http://hl7.org/fhir/us/davinci-pdex/StructureDefinition/pdex-provider-access-use-case').value.ofType(boolean)"
			}

> 

Reviewer: Good to mention here that they would need the Da Vinci Specific conformance reources to be loaded into the admin db before being able to use this feature.

Author: not strictly necessary for the indexing, but indeed good to mention! I added it

$davinci-data-export
--------------------

Kickoff endpoint
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> DaVinci Data Export is initiated as a Group-level operation:

Reviewer: Maybe good to explicitly mention that it is not meant to be used for Patient or System level exports.

**url:** ``[firely-server-base]/Group/<group-id>/$davinci-data-export``

> In contrast to standard Group BDE kickoff (``/Group/<group-id>/$export``), this operation name is DaVinci specific.

Reviewer: I guess this is already clear from the example you give, I would leave this out.

> For DaVinci kickoff, Firely Server supports POST requests only.

Reviewer: Users may not know what you mean with kick-off, I would rephrase this a bit: "For initiating the export, Firely Server supports POST requests only"

Author: GET and POST are both supported now, like in BDE

Supported parameters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Firely Server handles DaVinci kickoff using the same filtering semantics as BDE for shared parameters.

Reviewer: Again, try to avoid the use of the word kick-off here, maybe rephrase to DaVinci export request

> The DaVinci operation also defines the ``exportType`` parameter to identify the requested Da Vinci use case.

Reviewer: You mention it below in the table, but I would already mention explicitly here that we only mention one export type:  ``hl7.fhir.us.davinci-atr`` and that typeFilter is not yet supported.

Author: I made it a bit clearer, but chose not to repeat the info in the text

Servers are expected to provide detailed export guidance in the applicable implementation guide.

Supported ``_type`` values for ATR
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

+--------------------+---------------------------+
| Resource Type      | Requirement               |
+====================+===========================+
| ``Group``          | Required                  |
+--------------------+---------------------------+
| ``Patient``        | Required                  |
+--------------------+---------------------------+
| ``Coverage``       | Required                  |
+--------------------+---------------------------+
| ``RelatedPerson``  | Optional                  |
+--------------------+---------------------------+
| ``Practitioner``   | Optional                  |
+--------------------+---------------------------+
| ``PractitionerRole`` | Optional                  |
+--------------------+---------------------------+
| ``Organization``   | Optional                  |
+--------------------+---------------------------+
| ``Location``       | Optional                  |
+--------------------+---------------------------+

> If the ``_type`` parameter is omitted, Firely Server defaults to exporting exactly the three required types: ``Group``, ``Patient``, and ``Coverage``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the ``_type`` parameter is omitted, Firely Server defaults to exporting only the three required types: ``Group``, ``Patient``, and ``Coverage``.
```

	Content-Type: application/fhir+json
	Prefer: respond-async

	{
		"resourceType": "Parameters",
		"parameter": [
			{
				"name": "exportType",
				"valueCanonical": "http://hl7.org/fhir/us/davinci-atr"
			},
			{
				"name": "_since",
				"valueInstant": "2026-01-01T00:00:00Z"
			}
		]
	}

Response and task lifecycle
---------------------------

After kickoff, DaVinci export follows the same asynchronous task flow as BDE:

* queued task creation
* polling task state through ``$exportstatus``
* retrieving generated NDJSON files through ``$exportfilerequest``

For response examples and status details, see:

* :ref:`bdeexportstatus`
* :ref:`feature_bulkdataexport`

Group membership handling
-------------------------

DaVinci exports inherit the same Group-based export handling used by BDE.
This includes ATR-specific Group member inclusion behavior documented on the BDE page.

See :ref:`feature_bulkdataexport` for full details.

Security and authorization
--------------------------

When SMART on FHIR is enabled, the same token and scope behavior used by BDE applies to DaVinci export task initiation and retrieval endpoints.

> See the section "Filtering export results with SMART scopes" on :ref:`feature_bulkdataexport`.

Reviewer: You should mention here that for consent filtering a specific SoF scope for access to Consent resources is necessary.

> 

Reviewer: I still miss the part on consent filtering

Reviewer: You now mention consent filtering briefly with regard to SoF scopes, maybe you can elaborate a bit here? It is good for the user to know what part of the consent resource is checked for denial/approval. Also good to know that only consent resources adhering to the atr profile will be evaluated.

Author: I added some extra explanation with a link to the IG

> 

Reviewer: I miss the part where only consent and group resources with the correct canonical can be called and exported with this operation.

Author: this is  now under the 'Group membership handling' header

.. _feature_davinci_data_export:

====================
DaVinci Data Export
====================

.. note::

	The features described on this page are available in the following :ref:`Firely Server editions <vonk_overview>`:

	* Firely Prior Authorization - 🇺🇸

This operation is defined by the Da Vinci ATR implementation guide as a specialized version of Bulk Data Export:
`OperationDefinition: davinci-data-export <https://build.fhir.org/ig/HL7/davinci-atr/OperationDefinition-davinci-data-export.html>`_.

Relationship to Bulk Data Export
--------------------------------

> Summary of how ``$davinci-data-export`` relates to BDE in Firely Server:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Summary of how ``$davinci-data-export`` relates to :ref:`feature_bulkdataexport` in Firely Server:
```

* Same asynchronous export pipeline and task handling
* Same export status and file retrieval endpoints
* Same storage and retention behavior
* Same filtering behavior for shared parameters

> * Different kickoff operation name (``$davinci-data-export``)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Different export operation name (``$davinci-data-export``)
```

* DaVinci specific ``exportType`` parameter

Introduction
------------

**Background and Purpose**

> The Da Vinci Data Export specification was developed to address a critical need in health information exchange: enabling safe, controlled data sharing between providers and payers without exposing sensitive patient clinical details. Traditional bulk data export mechanisms include all clinical data (encounters, observations, procedures, etc.), which may not be appropriate or necessary for certain provider-to-payer workflows. The DaVinci export IG constrains what data is exported to only what is essential for specific use cases, creating a more secure and efficient exchange pattern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The DaVinci Data Export specification was developed to address a critical need in health information exchange: enabling safe, controlled data sharing between providers and payers without exposing sensitive patient clinical details. Traditional bulk data export mechanisms include all clinical data (encounters, observations, procedures, etc.), which may not be appropriate or necessary for certain provider-to-payer workflows. The DaVinci export IG constrains what data is exported to only what is essential for specific use cases, creating a more secure and efficient exchange pattern.
```

**Key Characteristics**

A critical distinction of DaVinci Data Export is what it **does not** include:

* Patient-specific clinical data such as **Encounters**, **Observations**, **Procedures**, and other detailed clinical records are **not exported**
* The export focuses on structural data (Patients, Groups, Coverage, Practitioners, and Organizations) that is necessary for reference and attribution purposes
* This makes DaVinci export a safe option for provider-to-payer data sharing, as sensitive clinical information remains protected at the originating system

**Supported Use Cases**

DaVinci Data Export currently supports:

* **Member Attribution** (ATR - Attribution via Terms and Rules): Enables providers to share member/patient attribution data with payers for care coordination and quality reporting purposes, without exposing detailed clinical information

> Use this page for DaVinci specific behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> For shared export behavior and operational concepts, see :ref:`feature_bulkdataexport`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Configuration
-------------

> DaVinci Data Export builds on the same plugin and infrastructure configuration as BDE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DaVinci Data Export builds on the same plugin and infrastructure configuration as :ref:`feature_bulkdataexport`
```

> Use the same setup described in :ref:`feature_bulkdataexport_configuration`, including:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is configured similarly to what is described in :ref:`feature_bulkdataexport_configuration`, with a couple of pre-requisites:
```

* BDE plugin enablement in the PipelineOptions:

	* including: ``Vonk.Plugin.BulkDataExport.GroupBulkDataExportConfiguration``
	* and additionally (for DaVinci): ``Vonk.Plugin.BulkDataExport.DaVinci.DaVinciDataExportConfiguration``

* task repository configuration on the ``/administration`` branch
* ``TaskFileManagement`` storage configuration
* ``BulkDataExport`` settings such as ``RepeatPeriod`` and retention settings

> Because DaVinci export reuses the BDE task pipeline, there is no separate task storage or file storage configuration specific to ``$davinci-data-export``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because DaVinci Data Export reuses the BDE task pipeline, it can reuse the same settings.
```

Prerequisites
-------------

There are a few prerequisites specifically for this export.

> 1. The DaVinci ATR conformance resources package must be installed on the server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The DaVinci ATR specific conformance resources must be loaded in the administration database. See :ref:`_conformance`
```

2. A search parameter for the PDex provider access use case flag on ``Consent.provision.action`` must be defined on the server. This is required for the ATR export use case, which filters ``Consent`` resources based on this flag. Add the search parameter and refresh the actual index as described in :ref:`the search parameter re-indexing documentation <feature_customsp_reindex_specific>`:

	 .. code-block:: json

			{
				"resourceType": "SearchParameter",
				"id": "consent-pdex-provider-access-use-case",
				"url": "http://hl7.org/fhir/us/davinci-pdex/SearchParameter/consent-pdex-provider-access-use-case",
				"version": "4.0.1",
				"name": "ConsentPdexProviderAccessUseCase",
				"status": "active",
				"publisher": "Firely",
				"description": "Search Consent resources by the PDex provider access use case flag on provision.action",
				"code": "pdex-provider-access-use-case",
				"base": ["Consent"],
				"type": "token",
				"expression": "Consent.provision.action.extension.where(url='http://hl7.org/fhir/us/davinci-pdex/StructureDefinition/pdex-provider-access-use-case').value.ofType(boolean)"
			}

$davinci-data-export
--------------------

> Kickoff endpoint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Export Request
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> DaVinci Data Export is initiated as a Group-level operation (Patient and System level exports are not supported). Both GET and POST methods are supported on this endpoint:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DaVinci Data Export is initiated as a Group-level operation (Patient and System level exports are not supported). Both GET and POST methods are supported:
```

**url:** ``[firely-server-base]/Group/<group-id>/$davinci-data-export``

> In case of a POST request, a FHIR Parameters resource must be provided as the payload

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case of a POST request, a FHIR Parameters resource must be provided as the payload. An example of such a request would look as follows:

.. code-block:: text

	POST {{BASE_URL}}/Group/{{GROUP_ID}}/$davinci-data-export
	Content-Type: application/fhir+json
	Prefer: respond-async

	{
		"resourceType": "Parameters",
		"parameter": [
			{
				"name": "exportType",
				"valueCanonical": "http://hl7.org/fhir/us/davinci-atr"
			},
			{
				"name": "_since",
				"valueInstant": "2026-01-01T00:00:00Z"
			}
		]
	}
```

Supported parameters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Firely Server handles DaVinci using the same filtering semantics as BDE for shared parameters.
The DaVinci operation also defines the ``exportType`` parameter to identify the requested Da Vinci use case.

+-------------------+-----------+--------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| Parameter         | Supported | Type               | Additional Notes                                              |
+===================+===========+====================+===============================================================+
| ``exportType``    | ✅        | ``canonical``      | Indicates the type of export to perform. This parameter       |
|                   |           |                    | is DaVinci-specific and is not part of the base Bulk Data     |

> |                   |           |                    | Export operation (see below)                                        |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|                   |           |                    | Export operation. Firely Server currently only supports the ``hl7.fhir.us.davinci-atr`` exportType                                        |
```

+-------------------+-----------+--------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------+

> | ``patient``       | ✅        | ``reference``      | Same behavior as BDE for POST requests (not allowed in GET)   |

Reviewer: How come this is not supported for GET? Above, you mention that both GET and POST will be supported.

Author: this is also not the case in BDE for privacy reasons

|                   |           |                    | defaults to exactly these three required types.               |
|                   |           |                    | Optional types: ``RelatedPerson``, ``Practitioner``,          |
|                   |           |                    | ``PractitionerRole``, ``Organization``, ``Location``.         |
+-------------------+-----------+--------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``_typeFilter``   | ❌        | ``string``         | Not supported.                                                |
+-------------------+-----------+--------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``_elements``     | ✅        | FHIR element       | Same behavior as BDE.                                         |
+-------------------+-----------+--------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------+
| ``_outputFormat`` | ✅        | ``string``         | Only ``application/ndjson`` is supported.                     |
+-------------------+-----------+--------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------+

> Supported ``exportType`` values (examples)

Reviewer: If you mention this in the table above, people do not have to look in different places for related information, thereby making the docs a bit clearer. This section can than be removed.

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Currently, Firely Server only supports the following exportType

+--------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+
| ``exportType`` value                 | Use case                                                 |
+======================================+==========================================================+
| ``hl7.fhir.us.davinci-atr``          | Da Vinci Member Attribution export.                      |
+--------------------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------+

> Servers are expected to provide detailed export guidance in the applicable implementation guide.

Reviewer: Do you mean to tell here that the CpS should list this operation? What does this mean for the end user?

Author: weird sentence indeed. It is no longer there

> Supported ``_type`` values for ATR

Reviewer: Since you already mention this in the table above, I would not mention this here in a separate section.

Author: You are right, but i solved it by removing the text in the first table and leaving the _type table there since there is more to say about it than was mentioned in the cell.

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

+----------------------+---------------------------+
| Resource Type        | Requirement               |
+======================+===========================+
| ``Group``            | Required                  |
+----------------------+---------------------------+
| ``Patient``          | Required                  |
+----------------------+---------------------------+
| ``Coverage``         | Required                  |
+----------------------+---------------------------+
| ``RelatedPerson``    | Optional                  |
+----------------------+---------------------------+
| ``Practitioner``     | Optional                  |
+----------------------+---------------------------+
| ``PractitionerRole`` | Optional                  |
+----------------------+---------------------------+
| ``Organization``     | Optional                  |
+----------------------+---------------------------+
| ``Location``         | Optional                  |
+----------------------+---------------------------+

If the ``_type`` parameter is omitted, Firely Server defaults to exporting only the three required types: ``Group``, ``Patient``, and ``Coverage``.

> Request examples

Reviewer: I would move this to line 108 and remove this section here, also since you are only providing one example.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Example POST kickoff:

.. code-block:: text

	POST {{BASE_URL}}/Group/{{GROUP_ID}}/$davinci-data-export
	Content-Type: application/fhir+json
	Prefer: respond-async

	{
		"resourceType": "Parameters",
		"parameter": [
			{
				"name": "exportType",
				"valueCanonical": "http://hl7.org/fhir/us/davinci-atr"
			},
			{
				"name": "_since",
				"valueInstant": "2026-01-01T00:00:00Z"
			}
		]
	}

Response and task lifecycle
---------------------------

> After kickoff, DaVinci export follows the same asynchronous task flow as BDE:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After kickoff, DaVinci Data Export follows the same asynchronous task flow as BDE:
```

* queued task creation
* polling task state through ``$exportstatus``
* retrieving generated NDJSON files through ``$exportfilerequest``

For response examples and status details, see:

* :ref:`bdeexportstatus`
* :ref:`feature_bulkdataexport`

Group membership handling
-------------------------

The Group targeted by ``$davinci-data-export`` is the Member Attribution List defined by the Da Vinci ATR IG, not an arbitrary Group. This Group conforms to the ATR Group profile 'http://hl7.org/fhir/us/davinci-atr/StructureDefinition/atr-group'
Per the ATR specification, the Group represents a contract-specific attribution list and is expected to conform to the ATR Group profile, with member entries identifying the attributed patients and their associated attribution details.

When the optional ``patient`` parameter is supplied, only patients that are already members of the identified Group are exported.
When ``patient`` is omitted, Firely Server exports data for all members in the Group.

See :ref:`feature_bulkdataexport` for full details.

Security and authorization
--------------------------

> When SMART on FHIR is enabled, the same token and scope behavior used by BDE applies to DaVinci export task initiation and retrieval endpoints. There is one additional requirement: as the DaVinci export checks for consent (a Patient can opt-out) the DaVinci export requires read access to Consent resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When SMART on FHIR is enabled, the same token and scope behavior used by BDE applies to DaVinci Data Export task initiation and retrieval endpoints. There is one additional requirement: as the DaVinci Data Export checks for consent (a Patient can opt-out) the DaVinci Data Export requires read access to Consent resources.
```
